CIP-0195? | Data Encoding of Plutus V4 Ledger Types (#1238)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CIP-plutus-v4-encoding/README.md

---
CIP: "?"
Title: Data Encoding of Plutus V4 Ledger Types
Category: Plutus
Status: Proposed
Authors:
    - Ziyang Liu <ziyang.liu@iohk.io>
Implementors:
    - Plutus team

>     - Developers of languages targeting UPLC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementors:
    - IOG Plutus Team <https://iohk.io>
```
This is the first of the sections that caused our CIP validator to fail: https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/actions/runs/30840445337/job/91775891099?pr=1238 — on entries unqualified with either a personal/project email address or a domain name.
1. `https://iohk.io` may not be very specific either, but it's been used in the most recently published Plutus CIP that has anything other than `N/A` in this field ([CIP-0133](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/tree/master/CIP-0133)).
2. If the downstream language developers are not known yet, there is therefore no way of listing them here.

Discussions:

>     - https://github.com/IntersectMBO/plutus/issues/7342

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discussions:
    - Original PR: https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/1238
    - Plutus repo discussion: https://github.com/IntersectMBO/plutus/issues/7342
```
The validator also requires that these fields be labelled (they generally appear horizontally so labels should be as short as possible).

Created: 2026-08-03
License: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Abstract

This CIP specifies how the Plutus V4 ledger API types, including script context and the types it mentions, are to be encoded as `Data` objects.
New UPLC primitives and language features, together with lessons learned from Plutus V1-V3, create an opportunity to adopt a simpler and more efficient encoding scheme.

> ## Motivation: why is this CIP necessary?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Motivation: Why is this CIP necessary?
```
Also a validation requirement (we have fixed the unsightly institutionalised capitalisation error everywhere else).

      Integer
      -- ^ the certificate index (within the transaction)
  | NoStakingCredential

-- flattened from the `Interval` in V1-V3
data Interval a = Interval
  { ivFrom        :: Extended a
  , ivFromClosure :: Closure
  , ivTo          :: Extended a
  , ivToClosure   :: Closure
  }

type POSIXTimeRange = Interval POSIXTime
```

The encoding rules are:

1. __Built-in types.__
   `Integer` encodes as `I`; `ByteString` as `B`; `Data` encodes as itself; `[]` encodes as `List`; `Map` encodes as `Map`; `Value` encodes as the new `Value` constructor of `Data` (this differs from V1-V3 where `Value` isn't a built-in type).
2. __Newtypes.__
   Newtypes are transparent: a newtype encodes the same as its underlying type.
3. __Product types__.
   Product types encode as `List [x1...xn]`, where `xi` is the encoding of the `i`-th field.
   This differs from V1-V3, which encodes product types using `Constr 0`.
4. __Sum types.__
   Sum types encode as `Constr t [x1...xn]`, where `t` is the constructor's 0-based index, and `xi` is the encoding of the `i`th constructor field.
   Constructors are indexed in the order in which they appear in the above Haskell datatypes.

> ### Alternatives considered

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Rationale: How does this CIP achieve its goals?
```
Finally (as per the standard format) there was no literal _Rationale_ here but I think this section has everything we generally look for there.

__Using bare `List`/`Array` to encode sum types__.
We previously proposed that product types should be encoded using `List`, rather than `Constr`.
We could do the same for sum types, where the first element of the `List` would represent the constructor tag.

If we use list-encoding, there would be little reason to do this, since it won't be cheaper than using `Constr`.
If we use array-encoding, then it would be slightly more appealing because it would allow us to avoid adding the `ConstrArray` constructor to `Data`.
However, accessing the constructor tag would then require an `indexArray 0` call which is much more expensive than extracting the tag from `ConstrArray`.
Also, under this approach, a product type and a sum type could have the same `Data` representation; it is unclear whether this could lead to problems.

## Path to Active

### Acceptance Criteria

- [ ] The encoding rules and revised types are implemented in `plutus-ledger-api`.
- [ ] A new `Data` type is created in `plutus-ledger-api` for Plutus V4, which should contain the `Value` constructor.

### Implementation Plan

> This should be implemented by the Plutus team as well as author of other languages targeting UPLC, and related tooling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Implementation by the Plutus team
- [ ] Implementation by any authors of other languages targeting UPLC
- [ ] Implementation in related tooling
```
A broken-up list would give a chance to document these milestones in case the implementation happens progressively.

---

> CIP: "?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CIP: 195
```

If the Plutus V4 types are encoded using lists, no further addition to `Data` will be required.
If they are encoded using arrays, then we'll need two additional constructors - `Array` and `ConstrArray` - together with four additional built-ins for wrapping and unwrapping.
Adding more constructors to `Data` would also make the `chooseData` built-in more complex.

__Lists are usually faster than arrays for working with datatypes__:

- For single-field access, `List` is almost always faster in practice.
  Although `dropList` is linear and `indexArray` is constant-time, `dropList`'s cost model has a low intercept and slope, making list encoding faster than array encoding even when accessing the 20th field of a constructor.

  This has taken into account that `indexArray` directly returns the requested field, while list-encoding requires a call to `headList` after `dropList`.
  Even with this overhead, list-encoding remains faster for the 20th field.

  It is true that if `k` is sufficiently large, accessing the `k`th field of a list can be arbitrarily more expensive than accessing the `k`th field of an array.

>   However, this is irrelevant since among the Plutus V4 types, the constructor with the most fields is `TxInfo`, which as 20 fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  However, this is irrelevant since among the Plutus V4 types, the constructor with the most fields is `TxInfo`, which has 20 fields.
```

- it could also cause datatype proliferation if we need to keep the original nested type because it is used independently.
  For example, if `StakingCredential` is used independently (not under `Maybe`), then we may need to keep both `StakingCredential`, as well as the flattened `Maybe StakingCredential`.

Given these considerations, it appears that the only suitable candidate for flattening in the [originally proposed script context definition](https://github.com/IntersectMBO/plutus/issues/7342#issuecomment-4799132923) is `Maybe StakingCredential`.
Since `StakingCredential` always appears under `Maybe`, we can replace `Maybe StakingCredential` with a flattened datatype without also retaining the original `StakingCredential` type.

__Nested product types.__
Nested product types can likewise be flattened into a single larger product type.
As with sum types, this should be done selectively, especially if we use list-encoding rather than array-encoding, because
- Flattening produces a longer list, making `dropList` more expensive
- Flattening makes constructing the nested type harder.
  For example, suppose type `A` contains a field of type `B`.

>   If we flatten `B` into `A`, producing a flattend type `A'`, reconstructing `B` from `A'` becomes much more difficult and costly than extracting `B` directly from `A`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If we flatten `B` into `A`, producing a flattened type `A'`, reconstructing `B` from `A'` becomes much more difficult and costly than extracting `B` directly from `A`.
```

  -- the whole transaction is applied
  , topTxInfoSimplified :: TopTxInfoSimplified
  -- ^ Aggregated view on the whole transaction, namely information about sub-transactions and the
  -- top level transaction all concatenated together with loss of some information
  }

data Address = Address
  { addressCredential :: Credential
  -- ^ the payment credential
  , addressStakingCredential :: StakingCredential
  -- ^ the staking credential (flattened)
  }

-- flattend from `Maybe StakingCredential`
data StakingCredential
  = {-| The staking hash is the `Credential` required to unlock a transaction output. Either
    a public key credential (`Crypto.PubKeyHash`) or
    a script credential (`ScriptHash`). Both are hashed with /BLAKE2b-244/. 28 byte. -}
    StakingHash Credential
  | {-| The certificate pointer, constructed by the given
    slot number, transaction and certificate indices.
    NB: The fields should really be all `Word64`, as they are implemented in `Word64`,
    but 'Integer' is our only integral type so we need to use it instead. -}
    StakingPtr
      Integer
      -- ^ the slot number
      Integer
      -- ^ the transaction index (within the block)
      Integer

>       -- ^ the certificate index (within the transaction)

Reviewer 3: Ptr is gone from `PlutusV4`.
Which means we should simply get rid of  `StakingCredential` in favor of `Maybe AccountId` in `Address`

```haskell
data Address = Address
  { addressCredential :: Credential
  , addressStakingAccountId :: Maybe AccountId
  }
```

```suggestion
```

Author: Updated the datatypes in https://github.com/IntersectMBO/plutus/pull/7876

Reviewer 4: Most offchain libraries use the names `addressCredential` and `addressStakingCredential`. Now that we got rid of StakingPtr(finally!), I propose we remove `AccountId` wrapper type and use `Credential` directly like so:

```hs
data Address = Address
  { addressCredential :: Credential
  , addressStakingCredential :: Maybe Credential
  }
```

Reviewer 3: It is best to distinguish AccountId from other Credentials
```haskell
data Address = Address
  { addressCredential :: Credential
  , addressStakingAccountId :: Maybe AccountId
  }
```

Author: Updated.

Reviewer 5: What is `AccountId`? Here we are concerned around `Data` encoding, in which case `Maybe Credential` and `Maybe AccountId` are fungible.

Author: > Maybe Credential and Maybe AccountId are fungible.

Not exactly.

If `Credential` both appears under `Maybe` and standalone, then I wouldn't flatten `Maybe Credential`, since we'd need to keep two separate datatypes, `FlattenedMaybeCredential` and `Credential`, which is at the very least inconvenient.

If `AccountId` only appears under `Maybe`, then it's fine to flatten it, since we don't need to keep `AccountId` any more. However, I don't think this is the case - @lehins could you confirm?
